Add iOS tracker 1.3.0 release post (#1335)
snowplow/snowplowanalytics.com: _posts/2020-04-17-snowplow-ios-tracker-1.3.0-released/index.md

---
layout: post
title: "Snowplow iOS Tracker 1.3.0 released"
title-short: Snowplow iOS Tracker 1.3.0
tags: [snowplow, objc, ios, tracker]
author: Alex Benini
category: Releases

> permalink: /blog/2020/04/17/snowplow-ios-tracker-1.3.0-released/

Reviewer: will this get updated with today's date?

Author: yep, fixing it! 👍 
It's probably something that we should update when we merge on master /cc @nepsil0n

> permalink: /blog/2020/04/17/snowplow-ios-tracker-1.3.0-released/

Author: I set 24th because it seems improbable to publish this post today.

```suggestion
permalink: /blog/2020/04/24/snowplow-ios-tracker-1.3.0-released/
```

> permalink: /blog/2020/04/24/snowplow-ios-tracker-1.3.0-released/

Author: ```suggestion
permalink: /blog/2020/04/28/snowplow-ios-tracker-1.3.0-released/
```

discourse: false
---

We are pleased to announce a new release of the [Snowplow iOS Tracker][objc-tracker].

> [Version 1.3.0][1.3.0-tag] is an important release that introduces Global Contexts, GDPR contexts and support for the Swift Package Manager thanks to the contribution of [@vauxhall][contributor]. Swift Package Maanger completes the list of supported dependency managers, which already includes Cocoapods and Carthage. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Version 1.3.0][1.3.0-tag] is an important release that introduces Global Contexts, GDPR contexts and support for the Swift Package Manager thanks to the contribution of [@vauxhall][contributor]. Swift Package Manager completes the list of supported dependency managers, which already includes Cocoapods and Carthage. 
```

Read on below for:

1. [Global Contexts](#gc)
2. [Tracking GDPR basis for processing with the GDPR context](#gdpr)
3. [Swift Package Manager support](#spm)
4. [Deprecated methods](#deprecated)
5. [Updates and bug fixes](#updates)
6. [Documentation](#documentation)
7. [Getting help](#help)

<!--more-->

<h2 id="gc">1. Global Contexts</h2>

> We are happy to announce the integration of Global Contexts feature in the iOS tracker ([#357][357]).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are happy to announce the integration of the Global Contexts feature in the iOS tracker ([#357][357]).
```

<h3>1.1 A quick recap on contexts</h3>

> Contexts are entities tracked across multiple events. They are particularly important as they add value to the event through tracking extra information accord to a related schema. The schema will specify the kind of data tracked with the context. Typical contexts are: session, geolocation, page and screen views, device informations, user details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Contexts are entities tracked across multiple events. They are particularly important as they add value to the event through tracking extra information according to a related schema. The schema will specify the kind of data tracked with the context. Typical contexts are: session, geolocation, page and screen views, device informations, user details.
```

Some of the contexts are tracked out-of-the-box but it's possible to add custom context tracking to other domain specific events. There is no limit to the number of contexts attached to the events.
Not all contexts suit every event. Some of the contexts only make sense on specific events and it's up to the developer to handle these cases.

<h3>1.2 Introducing Global Contexts</h3>

> Prior to this release, developers needed to programmatically attach custom contexts to each specific event. The _global contexts_ feature helps the developer making this operation declarative.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prior to this release, developers needed to programmatically attach custom contexts to each specific event. The _global contexts_ feature helps the developer by making this operation declarative.
```

In this example, the ruleset provider will attach the generated contexts (as described in the previous section) to events with the schema `iglu:com.acme.*/*/jsonschema/*-*-*`, but not to `iglu:com.acme.marketing/*/jsonschema/*-*-*`.

{% highlight objc %}
NSString *allowed = @"iglu:com.snowplowanalytics.*/*/jsonschema/*-*-*";
NSString *denied = @"iglu:com.snowplowanalytics.mobile/*/jsonschema/*-*-*";

SPSchemaRuleset *ruleset = [SPSchemaRuleset rulesetWithAllowedList:@[allowed] andDeniedList:@[denied]];
SPGlobalContext *rulesetGC =
    [[SPGlobalContext alloc] initWithStaticContexts:@[[[SPSelfDescribingJson alloc] initWithSchema:@"iglu:com.snowplowanalytics.snowplow/test_sdj/jsonschema/1-0-1" andData:@{@"key": @"value"}]] ruleset:ruleset];
[tracker addGlobalContext:rulesetGC tag:@"tag1"];
{% endhighlight %}

<h5>Ruleset format</h5>

RuleSet's rules are the strings used to match against certain schemas, such as `iglu:com.acme/*/jsonschema/*-*-*`.

They follow the same five-part format as an Iglu URI:

{% highlight objc %}
protocol:vendor/event_name/format/version
{% endhighlight %}

> with the exception that a wildcard can be used in an allowed fashion to refer to all applying cases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
with the exception that a wildcard can be used to refer to all cases.
```

The parts of a rule are wildcarded with certain guidelines:

* asterisks cannot be used for the protocol (i.e. schemas always start with `iglu:`).

> * version matching must be specified like so: *-*-*, where any part of the versioning can be defined, e.g. 1-*-*, but only sequential parts can be wildcarded, e.g. 1-*-1 is invalid but 1-*-* is valid.</li><li>at least two parts parts: `com.acme.*` is valid, while `com.*` is not.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* version matching must be specified like so: *-*-*, where any part of the versioning can be defined, e.g. 1-*-*, but only sequential parts can be wildcarded, e.g. 1-*-1 is invalid but 1-*-* is valid.</li><li>at least two parts: `com.acme.*` is valid, while `com.*` is not.
```

> * version matching must be specified like so: *-*-*, where any part of the versioning can be defined, e.g. 1-*-*, but only sequential parts are to be wildcarded, e.g. 1-*-1 is invalid but 1-*-* is valid.</li><li>at least two parts parts: `com.acme.*` is valid, while `com.*` is not.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* version matching must be specified like so: *-*-*, where any part of the versioning can be defined, e.g. 1-*-*, but only sequential parts can be wildcarded, e.g. 1-*-1 is invalid but 1-*-* is valid.</li><li>at least two parts parts: `com.acme.*` is valid, while `com.*` is not.
```

> * vendors cannot be defined with non-wildcarded parts between wildcarded parts: com.acme.*.marketing.* is invalid, while com.acme.*.\https://zoom.us/j/779696786* is valid.

Reviewer 2: Whats with the Zoom URL in the middle of this? Is that intentional?

Author: 🤦

> * vendors cannot be defined with non-wildcarded parts between wildcarded parts: com.acme.*.marketing.* is invalid, while com.acme.*.\https://zoom.us/j/779696786* is valid.

Author: ```suggestion
* vendors cannot be defined with non-wildcarded parts between wildcarded parts: com.acme.*.marketing.* is invalid, while com.acme.*.* is valid.
```

<h5>Context Generator</h5>

In case the logic for filter and generator callbacks are too complex, it's possible to specify them in a class that implements `SPContextGenerator` protocol.

{% highlight objc %}
@protocol SPContextGenerator <NSObject>

/*!
 @brief Takes event information and decide if the context needs to be generated.
 @param event informations about the event to process.

>  @return weather the context has to be generated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 @return whether the context has to be generated.
```

 */
- (BOOL)filterFromEvent:(id<SPInspectableEvent>)event;

/*!
 @brief Takes event information and generates a context.
 @param event informations about the event to process.
 @return a user-generated self-describing JSON.
 */
- (nullable NSArray<SPSelfDescribingJson *> *)generatorFromEvent:(id<SPInspectableEvent>)event;

@end
{% endhighlight %}

> In this case the logic about filtering and generation is encapsulated behind a context generator class.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this case the logic for filtering and generation is encapsulated behind a context generator class.
```

    ];
}

@end
{% endhighlight %}

It can be passed to the tracker as usual:

{% highlight objc %}
SPGlobalContext *contextGeneratorGC = [[SPGlobalContext alloc] initWithContextGenerator:[GlobalContextGenerator new]];
[tracker addGlobalContext:rulesetGC tag:@"tag1"];
{% endhighlight %}

<h2 id="gdpr">2. Tracking GDPR basis for processing with the GDPR context</h2>

This release introduces the `gdprContext` and the `enableGdprContext` methods, which append a GDPR context to all events once enabled ([#425][425]).
This allows users to easily record the basis for data collection and relevant documentation, and enables a straightforward audit flow for all events.

It takes the following arguments:

|      **Name** | **Description**             | **Required?** | **Type** |
|--------------:|:----------------------------|:--------------|:---------|
|       `basis` | GDPR Basis for processing | Yes           | Enum String   |
|     `documentId` | ID of a GDPR basis document     | No           | String   |
|        `documentVersion` | Version of the document        | No            | String   |
| `documentDescription` | Description of the document | No            | String   |

> The required basisForProcessing accepts only the following literals: `consent`, `contract`, `legal_obligation`, `vital_interests`, `public_task`, `legitimate_interests` - in accordance with the [five legal bases for processing](https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-to-data-protection/guide-to-the-general-data-protection-regulation-gdpr/lawful-basis-for-processing/)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The required basisForProcessing accepts only the following literals: `consent`, `contract`, `legal_obligation`, `vital_interests`, `public_task`, `legitimate_interests` - in accordance with the [five legal bases for processing](https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-to-data-protection/guide-to-the-general-data-protection-regulation-gdpr/lawful-basis-for-processing/).
```

The GDPR context is enabled by calling the `setGdprContextWithBasis:documentId:documentVersion:documentDescription:` method of the tracker builder or by calling the `enableGdprContextWithBasis:documentId:documentVersion:documentDescription:` method once the tracker has been initialised.

It is called as follows:

{% highlight objc %}
SPTracker *tracker = [SPTracker build:^(id<SPTrackerBuilder> builder) {
    [builder setEmitter:emitter];
    ...
    [builder setGdprContextWithBasis:SPGdprProcessingBasisConsent
                          documentId:@"someId"
                     documentVersion:@"0.1.0"
                 documentDescription:@"a demo document description"];
}];
{% endhighlight %}

<h2 id="spm">3. Swift Package Manager support</h2>

> The Swift Package Manager is the official Apple's dependency manager designed for Swift libraries. Since Xcode 11 SPM is compatible with the iOS build system contributing to enlarge the mobile developers interst around this new dependency manager that will compete against the largely longtime used Cocoapods and Carthage.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Swift Package Manager is the official Apple dependency manager designed for Swift libraries. Since Xcode 11, SPM is compatible with the iOS build system.
```

> Thanks to the important contribute of [@vauxall][contributor] we have introduced the support of Swift Package Manager for our iOS tracker ([#474][474]). At the moment it supports only the iOS platform due to some limitations that we will resolve in the future releases, but it still is a great adding for our mobile tracker and a great contribute from our active community.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Thanks to the important contribution from [@vauxall][contributor], we have introduced the support of Swift Package Manager for our iOS tracker ([#474][474]). At the moment it supports only the iOS platform due to some limitations that we will resolve in future releases, but it is a great option for adding our mobile tracker and a great contribution from our active community.
```

To install Snowplow Tracker with SPM:

> 1. in your Xcode select File > Swift Packages > Add Package Dependency

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. In Xcode, select File > Swift Packages > Add Package Dependency
```

> 2. set the repository: https://github.com/snowplow/snowplow-objc-tracker

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Add the repository of: https://github.com/snowplow/snowplow-objc-tracker
```

> 3. add the modules to your project's targets on General tab > _Frameworks, Libraries & Embedded Content_ section

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Add the modules to your project's targets in the General tab > _Frameworks, Libraries & Embedded Content_ section
```

 
<h2 id="deprecated">4. Deprecated methods</h2>

> On this release we marked few methods as deprecated:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this release we've marked a few methods as deprecated:
```

> - SPEvent - `eventId`: This shouldn't be used as it can cause ambiguity about event duplication. That will be set only by the tracker. If your code set its own eventId we suggest to record your custom event ID in a custom context associated to all the events.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- SPEvent - `eventId`: This shouldn't be used as it can cause ambiguity about event duplication. This property will be set only by the tracker. If your code sets its own eventId we suggest to record your custom event ID in a custom context associated to all the events.
```

- SPEvent - `timestamp`: In a future major version we will remove the ability to override the timestamp of the event. That will be set only by the tracker. A custom timestamp can be eventually added using a different method or parameter in a future release.

> - SPEvent - `addDefaultParamsToPayload:`: This shouldn't be used as it's an internal method used by the tracker and it can be subject of future changes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- SPEvent - `addDefaultParamsToPayload:`: This shouldn't be used as it's an internal method used by the tracker and it can be subject to future changes. 
```

> - SPEvent - `timestamp`: In future major versions we will remove the ability to override the timestamp of the event. That will be set only by the tracker. A custom timestamp can be eventually added using a different method or parameter in a future release.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- SPEvent - `timestamp`: In future major versions we will remove the ability to override the timestamp of the event. That will be set only by the tracker. A custom timestamp can be eventually added using a different method or parameter in a future release.
```
```suggestion
- SPEvent - `timestamp`: In a future major version we will remove the ability to override the timestamp of the event. That will be set only by the tracker. A custom timestamp can be eventually added using a different method or parameter in a future release.
```

> Other few methods can be set as deprecated because mostly related to internal logic of the tracker. We strongly suggest to avoid use of methods marked deprecated as they will be substituted or removed in the next major version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Other methods have also been marked as deprecated because they are related to internal logic of the tracker. We strongly suggest avoiding the use of these methods marked deprecated as they will be substituted or removed in the next major version.
```

<h2 id="updates">5. Updates and bug fixes</h2>

- Fixed some warnings due to deprecated methods on last iOS versions ([#493][493], [#492][492], [#479][479]).

- Internal events refactoring ([#489][489]).

<h2 id="documentation">6. Documentation</h2>

As always, information about how to use the tracker can be found in the [iOS Tracker documentation][docs].

You can find the full release notes on GitHub as [Snowplow iOS Tracker v1.3.0 release][1.3.0-tag].

<h2 id="help">7. Getting help</h2>

> For help on integrating the tracker please have a look at the setup guide. If you have any questions or run into any problems, please visit our [Discourse forum][forums]. Please raise any bugs in the [iOS Tracker’s issues][issues] on GitHub.

Reviewer: What is the process for open source vs. insights customers integrating the tracker? If they are different maybe we can add a sentence about that here.

Author: Honestly I don't know. Everyone can raise a bug on GitHub. I guess Insight customers can contact us with Zendesk in case of issues. Actually I've copied and pasted this section by previous blog-post and from what I've seen no one mention insights. I can update it with anything better you suggest.
